Backup, Restore, Migration Tools
================================

Qubes supports easy backups and restores of your VMs, and specifically
very easy migration between two systems.

There are currently two command-line tools for this: ``qvm-backup`` and
``qvm-backup-restore``, both of which are available in Qubes Alpha 2
(qubes-core-dom0 >= 1.1.8). Users of Qubes Alpha 1 can still download
the ``qvm-backup`` too
`​here <http://qubes-os.org/yum/misc/qvm-backup>`__ and use it to make a
full backup of their system, and later restore it on Qubes Alpha 2,
using qvm-backup-restore (the latter is not available on Alpha 1).

Making a full backup of your VMs
--------------------------------

#. Prepare an encrypted external medium to store the backup

It is strongly recommended to use encrypted media for the backup.
``qvm-backup`` will not encrypt the backup!

Steps to create a fully encrypted LUKS volume on the external USB hard
drive /dev/sdb:

**WARNING**: Everything on your external USB drive will be deleted with
this process!

.. code:: wiki

    $ sudo wipefs -a /dev/sdb
    $ sudo cryptsetup luksFormat /dev/sdb
    $ sudo blkid /dev/sdb (this is your device UUID)
    $ sudo cryptsetup open --type luks UUID=the-long-UUID-of-your-DEVICE backup
    $ sudo mkfs.ext4 -m 0 /dev/mapper/backup

2. Mount the encrypted medium on which the backup will be stored

.. code:: wiki

    $ sudo mkdir /mnt/backup
    $ sudo mount /dev/mapper/backup /mnt/backup

Now anything we store in /mnt/backup is stored on the encrypted LUKS
volume of our external USB drive.

3. Backup your VMs

.. code:: wiki

    $ sudo qvm-backup /mnt/backup

The ``qvm-backup`` tool will take care about backing up the VMs
configuration, and all your AppVMs private storages, and, if necessary,
will also backup any custom templates or netvms that any of your AppVMs
might be using.

4. Lock the encrypted volume

.. code:: wiki

    $ sudo umount /mnt/backup
    $ sudo cryptsetup close backup

Restoring VMs from a backup
---------------------------

#. Mount the medium containing your VM backups

(It is advisable to script this to ensure the right UUID is always
attached to the right volume)

.. code:: wiki

    $ sudo cryptsetup open --type luks UUID=the-long-UUID-of-your-DEVICE backup
    $ sudo mount /dev/mapper/backup /mnt/backup

2. Restore VMs

.. code:: wiki

    $ sudo qvm-backup-restore /mnt/backup/<specific_backup_dir>

The ``qvm-backup-restore`` tool will restore all the VMs (and any backed
up custom template VMs), update the Qubes database and add appmenus for
the restored VMs. Your existing VMs will not be removed.

If there is a name conflict, i.e. you try restoring a VM with the same
name as a VM already on the host, ``qvm-backup-restore`` will refuse to
continue and will ask you to remove (or rename) the conflicting VM from
the host first.

3. Unmount your backup medium

.. code:: wiki

    $ sudo umount /mnt/backup
    $ sudo cryptsetup close backup

