Bug Reporting Guide
===================

One of the most important contribution task is reporting the bugs you
have found.

All bugs and suggestions should be reported to one of our `mailing
list </wiki/QubesLists>`__. We decided that at this stage access to the
wiki and the `​ticketing system <https://qubes-os.org/trac/report/3>`__
should be limited and per-invitation only, and generally granted to
those people who actually can first demonstrate that they are capable of
contributing something useful to the project. Our main goal is to build
a quality product, and this has a priority over building "a large
community".

So if you have not allowed to file new tickets You should follow these
guide lines:

#. Search the issue tracker to see if your issue is already there - if
   so please cite the issue # in any comments you post.

   -  `​Simple search <https://qubes-os.org/trac/search>`__
   -  `​Advanced search <https://qubes-os.org/trac/query>`__

2. Search the `mailing lists </wiki/QubesLists>`__ to see if your issue
   is already discussed - if so, add your comments to the existing
   thread.

3. If your problem seems to be a new one report it:

   -  as a mail - with a clear specific subject like "bug report:
      <specific description>"
   -  include steps to reproduce the problem if possible, and relevant
      log files (if you know);
   -  if its a hardware related issue include your `HCL </wiki/HCL>`__
      Support files as well.

5. Qubes core `developers </wiki/QubesDevelopers>`__ may ask you
   additional questions - please do follow up.

6. If the issue can be validated as a definite bug then he enters it
   into the `​issue tracker <https://qubes-os.org/trac/report/3>`__.

