Installation Guide (for Release 1 Alpha 1)
==========================================

At this stage we don't have a standalone automatic installer, so the
installation process is currently a bit complicated and requires some
knowledge of Linux. The installation consists of a few stages that are
described in detail below...

I. Installing Fedora 12 Linux
-----------------------------

First we need to install a minimal Linux distribution that would later
become our Dom0 system. We strongly recommend choosing a 64-bit Fedora
12 distribution.

#. Download the 64-bit version of Fedora 12 installation DVD ISO:

`​http://fedoraproject.org/en/get-fedora-all <http://fedoraproject.org/en/get-fedora-all>`__

...and burn it on a DVD. Proceed with the default installation...

While it is not absolutely necessary, you might want to enable the
Fedora 12 'Updates' repository during the installation to have the
updated versions of the packages installed. This requires a network
connection (wired, not wireless) during the installation, of course.

2. When asked about packages to install, choose

none, and choose "Customize now"...

3. ...in the next screen choose only the following groups of packages:

(i.e. uncheck all the other groups)

-  Desktop Environments/KDE
-  Applications/Editors
-  Base System/Base
-  Base System/Fonts
-  Base System/Hardware Support
-  Base System/X Window System

You really won't need anything more in Dom0 (even this is too much).

Complete the installation, reboot, verify you have X Window System
working, complete the post-installation setup in which you create an
unprivileged user account, that will be used for logging into the X
system.

If you can't get your X Window System working at this time, it means you
have have a graphics card not supported by a mainstream Linux
distribution. This really should happen only in case of some very exotic
hardware. In any case, this is nothing Qubes or Xen, related, so please
do not ask about the solution on Qubes or Xen mailing lists.

II. Installing Xen
------------------

#. Change to root:

   .. code:: wiki

       su -

#. Download the Qubes Master and "Release 1" signing keys:

   .. code:: wiki

       wget http://qubes-os.org/keys/qubes-master-signing-key.asc
       wget http://qubes-os.org/keys/qubes-release-1-signing-key.asc

`Verify the keys </wiki/WikiStart???>`__ and then install the key in the
rpm database:

.. code:: wiki

    rpm --import qubes-release-signing-key.asc

2. Configure Qubes repository:

   .. code:: wiki

       wget http://qubes-os.org/yum/qubes.repo
       mv qubes.repo /etc/yum.repos.d/

3. Install Xen and Dom0 kernel using the Qubes repository (Fedora 12
   doesn't

have support for Xen Dom0 kernel, and the Xen it provides is too old for
the Dom0 kernel that Qubes uses, that's why we install Xen and Dom0
kernel from Qubes repository):

.. code:: wiki

    yum install kernel-qubes-dom0

4. Reboot (but first read this whole paragraph) and verify that the X
   Window

System still works fine.

NOTE: Before rebooting you might consider changing the ``timeout=`` line
in your ``/boot/grub.conf`` file to something like ``3`` to give you
some time to choose a filesafe boot in GRUB menu in case your normal
boot would not work.

If you can't get your X Window System working at this time, it suggests
your graphics card driver is incompatible with Xen, which is a polite
way of saying that the driver is most likely broken, as any decently
written driver should be Xen compatible (when used in Dom0). The Xen
mailing list might be a proper place to report the problem, but we would
also be interested in learning about [STRIKEOUT:broken] Xen-incompatible
cards, so please also copy your report to the Qubes mailing list.

NOTE: If you have an NVidia graphics card, read the `NVidia
Troubleshooting Guide </wiki/NvidiaTroubleshooting>`__

III. Installing Qubes
---------------------

#. Install the Qubes Dom0 packages:

   .. code:: wiki

       yum install qubes-core-dom0 qubes-gui-dom0 qubes-dom0-cleanup

2. Add the user account you use to log into the system to the 'qubes'
   group:

   .. code:: wiki

       usermod -a -G qubes <username>

3. Set default NetVM (for now we will use dom0):

   .. code:: wiki

       qvm-set-default-netvm dom0

4. Reboot your system.

IV. Installing Qubes Virtual Machine Templates
----------------------------------------------

#. Now you can install a template image, which will be used for creating
   all

your AppVMs, and netvm image, used to isolate all your networking in an
unprivileged VM

.. code:: wiki

    yum install qubes-template-linux-x64 qubes-servicevm-netvm

This will probably take some time...

2. Now, lets create some AppVMs to see if this all works...

NOTE: you should now work as normal user, i.e. the same you use for
logging into your X system, and the same you added to the qubes 'group'
in the previous step, or you will not be able to star this VM as a
normal user!

.. code:: wiki

    qvm-create personal --label yellow
    qvm-create work --label green
    qvm-create shopping --label orange
    qvm-create bank --label green
    qvm-create random --label red

You can verify if new AppVMs have indeed been created by using qvm-ls:

.. code:: wiki

    qvm-ls

... and you can remove them using qvm-remove (be careful not to remove
your data accidentally!).

There are much more ``qvm-*`` tools in the ``/usr/bin`` -- most of them
should be self-explanatory.

3) Wait a few seconds and see if icons have been created and added to
the "Start" menu in your Dom0 Window Manager.

Try running some applications, e.g. Firefox from the random machine.
When you run an application for the first time, and the corresponding
AppVM has not yet been started, it might take some time (15-30 seconds)
for it to start. Subsequent apps from the same AppVM will be starting
much faster.

V. Switching to NetVM
---------------------

#. First shut down all the VMs in the system, e.g.:

   .. code:: wiki

       qvm-run --all --wait -uroot poweroff

2. Now as a root user do:

   .. code:: wiki

       /etc/init.d/qubes_netvm stop
       qvm-set-default-netvm netvm
       /etc/init.d/qubes_netvm start

3. Add ``iommu=pv`` option to Xen boot argument by editing the
   ``/boot/grub.conf`` file. Reboot.

4. Verify that Xen uses IOMMU/VT-d indeed by looking into ``xm dmesg``
   output

NOTE: Xen can use IOMMU/VT-d only if you have hardware with IOMMU/VT-d
support and a non-broken BIOS that also supports VT-d (specifically BIOS
should expose a correct ACPI DMAR table)
