VMs specially templates use disk space. Also default private storage max
size is 2 GB, but it is very easy to increase it as required. In case
you use all disk space you get the Out of disk space error that may
crash your system because also Dom0 does not have enough disk space to
work.

So it is a good practice to regularly check disk space usage with
command

.. code:: wiki

    df

in dom0 terminal.

A system in out of space condition should be able to boot, but may be
unable to load a desktop manager. In this case it is possible to login
to dom0 terminal with Alt + Ctrl + F2. To recover disk space it may be
possible to delete files in a userVM connecting to the userVM terminal:

.. code:: wiki

    qvm-start <VMname>
    sudo xl console <VMname>

If this does not work, check the size of /var/lib/qubes/qubes.xml. If it
is zero, you'll need to use one of the file backup (stored in
/var/lib/qubes/backup), hopefully you have the current data there. Find
the most recent one and place in /var/lib/qubes/qubes.xml instead of the
empty file.

In any case you'll need some disk space to start the VM. Check "df"
output if you have some. If not, some hints how to free some disk space:

#. Clean yum cache:

.. code:: wiki

    sudo yum clean all

2. Delete .img files of a less important VM, that can be found in

/var/lib/qubes/appvms/. Then, when the system is working again, cleanup
the rest with:

.. code:: wiki

    qvm-remove <VMname>

With this method you lose one VM data, but it'll more securely work.

3. Decrease filesystem safety margin (5% by default):

.. code:: wiki

    sudo tune2fs -m 4 /dev/mapper/vg_dom0-lv_root

4. Remove some unneeded files in dom0 home (if you have one, most likely
   no).

